[EDITS] Copy file to edits folder. (#1339)
mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime-3: modules/ROOT/edits/execution-engine.adoc

> = Execution Engine

Reviewer: Please implement the edits suggested for  https://github.com/mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime/pull/1338  to the duplicated texts here. I will focus on the changed texts.

ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:keywords: mule, threading, scheduler, non-blocking

> 

Reviewer: Same as previous, with an addition for both: consider moving the external cross-ref to the end of the section, instead of the beginning, and emphasize that this is for ADDITIONAL information, because we provide what they need for the context of this topic in the topic itself.

Mule runtime engine implements a reactive execution engine, tuned for non-blocking and asynchronous execution. +
To see more details about reactive programming, visit https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reactive_programming.

The task-oriented execution model enables you to take advantage of non-blocking IO at high concurrency levels transparently, meaning you don’t need to account for threading or asynchronicity in your flows. Each operation inside a Mule flow is a task that provides metadata about its execution, and Mule makes tuning decisions based on that metadata.

Mule Event processors indicate to Mule whether they are CPU intensive, CPU light, or IO intensive operations. These workload types help Mule tune for different workloads, so you don’t need to manage thread pools manually to achieve optimum performance. Instead, Mule introspects the available resources (such as memory and CPU cores) in the system to tune thread pools automatically.

[[processing_types]]

> == Processing Types

Reviewer: Same as previous, except SDK text

* CPU Light +
For quick operations (around 10ms), or Non-Blocking IO, for example, a Logger (`logger`) or HTTP Request operation (`http:request`). These tasks should not perform any blocking IO. The applicable strings in the logs are `CPU_LIGHT` and `CPU_LIGHT_ASYNC`.
* Blocking IO +
For IO that blocks the calling thread, for example, a Database Select operation (`db:select`) or a SFTP read (`sftp:read`) . Applicable strings in the logs are `BLOCKING` and `IO`.
* CPU Intensive +
For CPU-bound computations, usually taking more than 10ms to execute. These tasks should not perform any IO activities. Examples include the Transform Message component (`ee:transform`). The applicable string in the logs is `CPU_INTENSIVE`.

See specific component or module documentation to learn the processing type it supports. If none is specified, the default is CPU Light.

For connectors created with the Mule SDK, the SDK determines the most
appropriate processing type based on how the connector is implemented. For
details on that mechanism, refer to the xref:1.1@mule-sdk::index.adoc[Mule SDK documentation].

[[threading]]

> == Threading

Reviewer: Consider "UBER Pool Threading"

> Mule 4.3 contains one unique thread pool, called the UBER pool. This thread pool is managed by Mule and shared across all apps in the same Mule instance. At startup, Mule introspects the available resources (such as memory and CPU cores) in the system and tunes automatically for the environment where Mule is running. This algorithm was established through performance testing and found optimal values for most scenarios.

Reviewer: ditto previous edits to the text that is the same here

> The single thread pool allows Mule to be efficient, requiring significantly fewer threads (and their inherent memory footprint) to handle a given workload when compared to Mule 3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This single thread pool allows Mule 4.3 to be more efficient than Mule 3.x, requiring significantly fewer threads (and their inherent memory footprint) to process a given workload.
```
Did I get the versions right?

[NOTE]

> If you are upgrading from earlier Mule 4.x versions, see xref:4.2@execution-engine.adoc#threading[Threading in Mule 4.2] to understand the differences applied to the threading model in Mule 4.3.

Reviewer: Do all "earlier versions" apply to the referred-to topic for 4.2?

=== Proactor Pattern

> Proactor is a design pattern for asynchronous execution. To understand how the Proactor design pattern works, visit https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proactor_pattern

Reviewer: See comments in previous edit.

> According to this design pattern, all tasks are classified in categories that correspond to each of Mule processing types, and each task is submitted for execution to the UBER pool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
According to this design pattern, tasks are classified in categories that correspond to Mule processing types, and each task is submitted for execution to the UBER pool.
```

> Performance testing shows that applying the Proactor pattern leads to better performance, even with one unique thread pool, because it allows threads to go back to the main loop quicker, allowing the system to keep accepting new work while the IO tasks are blocked waiting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Performance testing shows that applying the Proactor pattern leads to better performance, even with one unique thread pool, because it allows threads to return to the main loop more quickly, allowing the system to continue to accept new work while the I/O tasks are blocked and waiting.
```

> === Transactions

Reviewer: As a single subtopic, consider merging this into the previous topic.
Also, I think this is more about thread-switching than transactions, right?

When there’s an active transaction, all thread switches are suspended. Event processors participating in the transaction are executed in the same thread.

> == Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Custom Configuration
```
OR
```suggestion
== Configuration at the Property Level
```
OR
```suggestion
== Configuration of Specific Properties
```

Reviewer: ...or do we want to refer to "Strategies" instead?
```suggestion
== Configuration Based on Pool Strategy
```
```suggestion
== Configuration of Properties Based on Pool Strategy
```

> The thread pool is automatically configured by Mule at startup time, by applying formulas that consider available resources such as CPU and memory. These formulas can be modified in the `MULE_HOME/conf/schedulers-pools.conf` file. The configuration file contains comments that document each of the properties, but depending on the configured pool strategy, you can configure specific properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although the thread pool is automatically configured by Mule at startup, applying formulas that consider available resources such as CPU and memory, you can modify these formulas in the `MULE_HOME/conf/schedulers-pools.conf` file. This configuration file contains comments that document each of the properties, but depending on your pool strategy, you can configure specific properties.
```

Configure the `org.mule.runtime.scheduler.SchedulerPoolStrategy` parameter to switch between the two available strategies:

* UBER +
Unified scheduling strategy. Default.
* DEDICATED +
Separated pools strategy. Legacy.

[source, properties, linenums]
----
# The strategy to be used for managing the thread pools that back the 3 types of schedulers in the Mule Runtime
# (cpu_light, cpu_intensive and I/O).
# Possible values are:
#    - UBER: All three scheduler types will be backed by one uber uber thread pool (default since 4.3.0)
#    - DEDICATED: Each scheduler type is backed by its own Thread pool (legacy mode to Mule 4.1.x and 4.2.x)
org.mule.runtime.scheduler.SchedulerPoolStrategy=UBER
----

> === UBER Scheduling Strategy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== UBER Pool Scheduling Strategy
```

* `org.mule.runtime.scheduler.uber.threadPool.threadKeepAlive=30000`

Example `schedulers-pools.conf` file:

[source, properties, linenums]
----
# The number of threads to keep in the uber pool.
# Supports Expressions
# Only applies when org.mule.runtime.scheduler.threadPool.strategy=UBER
org.mule.runtime.scheduler.uber.threadPool.coreSize=cores

# The maximum number of threads to allow in the uber pool.
# Supports Expressions
# Only applies when org.mule.runtime.scheduler.threadPool.strategy=UBER
org.mule.runtime.scheduler.uber.threadPool.maxSize=max(2, cores + ((mem - 245760) / 5120))

# The size of the queue to use for holding tasks in the uber pool before they are executed.
# Supports Expressions
# Only applies when org.mule.runtime.scheduler.threadPool.strategy=UBER
org.mule.runtime.scheduler.uber.workQueue.size=0

# When the number of threads in the uber pool is greater than SchedulerService.io.coreThreadPoolSize, this is the maximum
# Only applies when org.mule.runtime.scheduler.threadPool.strategy=UBER
# time (in milliseconds) that excess idle threads will wait for new tasks before terminating.
org.mule.runtime.scheduler.uber.threadPool.threadKeepAlive=30000
----

> === DEDICATED Pools Strategy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== DEDICATED Pool Scheduling Strategy
```

> When the strategy is set to `DEDICATED`, the parameters from the UBER strategy are ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the strategy is set to `DEDICATED`, the parameters from the default UBER strategy are ignored.
```

org.mule.runtime.scheduler.io.threadPool.maxSize=max(2, cores + ((mem - 245760) / 5120))

# The size of the queue to use for holding I/O tasks before they are executed.
# Supports Expressions
# Only applies when org.mule.runtime.scheduler.threadPool.strategy=DEDICATED
org.mule.runtime.scheduler.io.workQueue.size=0

# When the number of threads in the I/O pool is greater than SchedulerService.io.coreThreadPoolSize, this is the maximum
# time (in milliseconds) that excess idle threads will wait for new tasks before terminating.
# Only applies when org.mule.runtime.scheduler.threadPool.strategy=DEDICATED
org.mule.runtime.scheduler.io.threadPool.threadKeepAlive=30000

# The number of threads to keep in the cpu_intensive pool, even if they are idle.
# Supports Expressions
# Only applies when org.mule.runtime.scheduler.threadPool.strategy=DEDICATED
org.mule.runtime.scheduler.cpuIntensive.threadPool.size=2*cores

# The size of the queue to use for holding cpu_intensive tasks before they are executed.
# Supports Expressions
# Only applies when org.mule.runtime.scheduler.threadPool.strategy=DEDICATED
org.mule.runtime.scheduler.cpuIntensive.workQueue.size=2*cores
----

> ==== Considerations

Reviewer: Ditto previous edits to this same text in the other PR

MuleSoft doesn’t recommend changing the used pool strategy nor change its configuration values. Note that the configuration is global and affects the entire Mule Runtime instance.

MuleSoft recommends that you perform load and stress testing with all applications involved in real-life scenarios to validate any change in the threading configurations and to understand how the thread pools work in Mule 4.

=== Configuration at the Application Level

You can define the pool strategy to use in an application by adding the following to your application code:

[source, xml, linenums]
----
<ee:scheduler-pools poolStrategy="UBER" gracefulShutdownTimeout="15000">
   <ee:uber
       corePoolSize="1"
       maxPoolSize="9"
       queueSize="5"
       keepAlive="5"/>
</ee:scheduler-pools>
----

> Notice that there’s a `poolStrategy` parameter. This parameter exists for backwards compatibility reasons and allows you to switch back to the three pools scheme from prior versions of mule:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `poolStrategy` parameter exists for backward compatibility, enabling you to revert to the pools scheme from earlier Mule versions:
```

[source, xml, linenums]
----
<ee:scheduler-pools gracefulShutdownTimeout="15000">
   <ee:cpu-light
           poolSize="2"
           queueSize="1024"/>
   <ee:io
           corePoolSize="1"
           maxPoolSize="2"
           queueSize="0"
           keepAlive="30000"/>
   <ee:cpu-intensive
           poolSize="4"
           queueSize="2048"/>
</ee:scheduler-pools>
----

> ==== Considerations

Reviewer: ditto re. removing solitary Considerations sections and merging them into their containers.

Reviewer: Even though the following text is constructed differently from in the previous PR, I think that it can be reorganized and reworded to match it more closely. Suggest this order:
1. Mule recommends the default.
2. But you can customize.'
3. If you do, consult Support before production.

Reviewer: The existing org is copyedited only next.

> Applying pool configurations at the application level causes Mule to create a completely new set of thread pools for the Mule app. This configuration does not change the default settings configured in the `scheduler-conf.properties` file, which is particularly important for on-premises deployments because many Mule apps can be deployed to the same Mule instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applying pool configurations at the application level causes Mule to create a completely new set of thread pools for the Mule app. This configuration does not change the default settings in `scheduler-conf.properties`, which is particularly important for on-premises deployments in which many Mule apps are deployed to the same Mule instance.
```

> MuleSoft recommends running Mule using default settings.

Reviewer: Should be at the beginning.

> If you are upgrading from Mule 4.1.x or Mule 4.2.x you can use the DEDICATED strategy so that any customizations applied in the `scheduler-conf.properties` file can still be used. However, MuleSoft still recommends to try the new default setting first and then determine whether the optimizations are still required. Also, try first to customize the new UBER strategy before falling back to the legacy mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you upgrade from Mule 4.1.x or Mule 4.2.x you can use the DEDICATED strategy so that customizations to `scheduler-conf.properties` are still used. However, MuleSoft recommends that you test this default setting to determine whether the optimizations are still required. Also, try first to customize the new UBER strategy before reverting to the legacy mode.
```

> In any case, MuleSoft recommends consulting with Support before going into production with customized settings.

Reviewer: ditto prev. edit

> == Custom Pools

Reviewer: ditto prev. edits

Besides the unique UBER thread pool, some components might create additional pools for specific purposes, such as:

* NIO Selectors +
Enables non-blocking IO. Each connector can create as many as required.
* Recurring tasks pools +
Some connectors or components might create specific pools to perform recurring tasks (e.g: expiration monitors, queue consumers, etc.)

[[backpressure]]

> == Back-pressure

Reviewer: ditto prev. edits

Under heavy load, Mule might not have resources available to handle a specific event. This issue might occur because all threads are busy and cannot perform the handoff of the newly arrived event or because the current flow’s `maxConcurrency` value has been exceeded already.

In case Mule cannot handle an event, a message is logged about the condition: `Flow 'flowName' is unable to accept new events at this time`. Also, Mule sends a notification to the flow source to perform any required actions.

The actions Mule performs on back-pressure are specific to each connector’s source. For instance, an `http:listener` might return a `503` error code, while a message broker listener might provide the option to either wait for resources to be available or drop the message. In some cases, a source might disconnect from a remote system to avoid getting more data than it can process and then reconnect once the server state is normalized.

> == Upgrading from Mule 4.2/4.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Upgrading from Mule 4.2 or 4.1
```

Reviewer: Does this section come too late; haven't we already referred to this earlier in this set?

If you are upgrading from Mule 4.2.x or 4.1.x to Mule 4.3.x, take the following actions:

> * If there are no custom threading settings applied (either through the `scheduler-pools.conf` file or directly in the Mule app), then no action is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If no custom threading settings are applied (either through `scheduler-pools.conf` or directly in the Mule app), then no action is required.
```

> * If there are custom threading configurations applied, test your Mule applications with the default configuration. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If custom threading configurations are applied, test your Mule applications by using the default configuration. +
```

Because of the UBER pool strategy and other performance updates implemented in Mule 4.3, you might not need custom threading configurations.

> * If tests confirm that custom configuration is still necessary, then reach out to our Support team. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If tests confirm that custom configuration is still necessary, contact MuleSoft Support. +
```

> The best practice is to use a custom configuration only after our Support team has validated the root cause of the problem. Failing to follow this best practice can lead to inefficient use of resources and might hide underlying issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use a custom configuration only after Support has validated it. Failing to follow this best practice can lead to inefficient use of resources and might hide underlying issues.
```

== Troubleshooting

> When troubleshooting a Mule app, have in mind the naming convention used for threads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When troubleshooting a Mule app, consider thread naming conventions:
```

> Consider this flow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[source, xml, linenums]
----
<flow name="echoFlow">
   <http:listener config-ref="HTTP_Listener_config" path="/echo"/>
   <set-payload value="#['Echo ' ++ now()]" mimeType="text/plain"/>
   <logger level="ERROR" message="request at #[now()]" />
</flow>
----

After execution, the flow produces the following log:

----
ERROR 2020-03-12 19:13:45,292 [[MuleRuntime].uber.07: [echo].echoFlow.CPU_LITE @63e7e52c]
[event: bd56a240-64ae-11ea-8f7d-f01898419bde] org.mule.runtime.core.internal.processor.LoggerMessageProcessor:
request at 2020-03-12T19:13:45.283-03:00[America/Argentina/Buenos_Aires]
----

In this case, the thread name is `uber.07`. Mule also logs the type of the operation, which in this case is `CPU_LITE`.

> This also shows up on thread dumps or when using a profiler:

Reviewer: "This" what? Giving an `uber` threat name and a type in the log?
